Turtles spend most of their lives in water. They are adapted for aquatic life, with webbed feet or flippers and a streamlined body. Sea turtles rarely leave the ocean, except to lay eggs in the sand. Freshwater turtles live in ponds and lakes, and they climb out of the water onto logs or rocks to bask in the warm sun.
Tortoises are land animals. Their feet are round and stumpy, adapted for walking on land. They also dig burrows with their strong forelimbs, and slip underground when the sun gets too hot.
Terrapins live on land and in water, usually in swamps, ponds, lakes and rivers.
The largest sea turtle species is the leatherback turtle. It weighs 600 to 1,500 lbs.
One of the smallest turtles is the speckled Cape tortoise. Its shell is 3.1 inches (7.9 cm) long. It weighs about 5 ounces (142 grams).
Turtles are very adaptive and can be found on every continent, except Antarctica.
Turtles are not silent creatures. Some sound like electric motors, some sound like belching humans and some bark like dogs. The red-footed tortoise from South America clucks like a chicken.
The alligator snapping turtle lures in fish with its tongue, which looks like a worm.
Sea turtles have been around for 120 million years.
Turtles belong to one of the oldest reptile groups in the world – beating snakes, crocodiles and alligators!
Turtles date back to the time of the dinosaurs, over 200 million years ago
Just like your bones, a turtle’s shell is actually part of its skeleton. It’s made up of over 50 bones which include the turtle’s rib cage and spine.
Contrary to popular belief, a turtle cannot come out of its shell. The turtle’s shell grows with them, so it’s impossible for them to grow too big for it.
Many baby turtles start life as carnivores but grow to eat more plants as they mature.
The oldest turtle ever recorded, named Tu”i Malila, of Tonga Island, passed away at the grand old age of 188!
Sadly, many species of turtle are endangered! 129 of approximately 300 species of turtle and tortoise on Earth today are either vulnerable, endangered, or critically endangered. Threats include loss of habitat, poaching and the illegal pet trade.
All tortoises are actually turtles and calling a tortoise a turtle is not wrong.
In the Amazon, butterflies will drink the tears of turtles to provide necessary sodium in their diet.
In Kenya, a turtle adopted a hippo that was abandoned after a tsunami.
May 23 is celebrated as the “World Turtle Day”.
There is a giant softshell turtle that spends 95% of its life buried and motionless under river sand, surfacing just twice a day to take a breath.
Some turtles can breathe through their butts.
Pet turtles in the U.S. must be at least 4 inches long so children can’t fit them in their mouths and contract salmonellosis.
Snapping turtles evolved to have the snapping defense because they are too big to hide inside their shells like other turtles.
Turtles have three ears: one on either side of the head and a third on the nose.
Turtles are more closely related to birds than they are to lizards and snakes.
Some species of turtles can climb trees.
Turtles can hibernate underwater for months during winter, breathing through their tails.
Turtles manned the first successful circumlunar mission by the Soviet Russians.
Leatherback sea turtles can travel more than 10,000 miles every year.
When it’s time to lay their eggs, female sea turtles  return to the same nesting grounds where they were born.
Green sea turtles can stay underwater for up to five hours.
Leatherback sea turtles can weigh up to 2,000 pounds.
Only one turtle hatchling in a thousand will make it to adulthood.
Every species of turtle lays their eggs on land.
The leatherback turtle can swim at speeds up to 22 miles per hour.
Turtles are sensitive to the earth’s magnetic field, which is like a map to turtles.
Turtles live about twice as long as humans.
While most turtles live in or near water, tortoises are exclusively land animals.
Turtles have beaks, not teeth.
Turtles, while on land, can only hear sounds above 60 decibels. Humans can hear sounds starting at 20 decibels.
Turtles and tortoises lay anywhere from 20 to 200 eggs at a time.
Only five species of turtle live in Europe.
During the first year after hatching, many species of sea turtles are rarely seen. This first year is known as the "lost year".
The green sea turtle gets its name from the color of its body fat.
A sea turtle cannot retract its limbs, head or neck under its shell like a land turtle.
Like other reptiles, turtles are cold blooded.
Sea turtles have special glands which help remove salt from the water they drink.
In many turtle species, females are larger than males, while tortoise males are larger than females.
Both turtles and tortoises are among the most popular animals at the Smithsonian’s National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C.
Turtles and tortoises have very good vision and are drawn to bright colors.
There are more than 300 species of turtle that live all over the world.
